Good morning.
My name is Mark Tozer-Vilches.
I'm the desktop hardware evangelist at
Apple and Worldwide Developer Relations.
This is session 507,
Mac OS X High Performance Libraries.
The Vector Numerics Group,
if you're not familiar with them
already through the different sessions
this year as well as previous years,
has been doing a lot of work in
optimizing performance in the libraries
that we ship in our operating system,
as well as working with
several of our developers and
our own application groups.
If you've used iTunes,
a lot of the performance that
you see that we achieve in that
application is a result of this group.
Today we offer some more
and new information.
Yesterday the group also introduced
a new library for V-image,
vector image library processing.
Today I'd like to introduce
Steve Peters who will go
over these new libraries,
particularly understand how the 970,
the G5 processor takes
advantage of these libraries.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mark.
Welcome.
Good morning.
It's a wonderful time to be doing
mathematics on the Macintosh,
and I'd like to tell you a
little bit about why I think so.
One more time.
So by way of introduction,
I wanted to lay out what I think
our charter is in the numerics
and vectorization group.
First of all,
we want your apps to achieve
optimum floating point
performance on our platform.
We're in a great position
to help you with that today.
We also want to make sure
that your apps deliver robust,
high-quality numerics.
It's been a tradition at Apple since
the sane days back on the 68OXO to
deliver really the best in numerical
algorithms and the numerical science.
We continue to keep the bar high
and aim to set it even higher.
We want your apps to readily
port to industry standard
APIs in our Mac OS X frameworks.
This is a leverage point.
We take advantage of
open source software in
building these frameworks,
and we pay a great deal of attention
to optimization in these frameworks.
And finally,
we want your apps to enjoy easy access
to the Apple value-added features
such as Altevec in our platform,
and where we can transparently
give you access to those features,
we do, and you'll see a little
later how that works out.
So what you'll learn today.
We'd like to inform you about
floating point performance,
the floating point performance work
we're delivering for G5 in Panther.
We'll show you how to leverage
that work in your development.
We'll walk you through a regimen
that I've been using to squeeze
out the last bit of floating point
performance in the libraries.
You might find that helpful
in your applications.
And we'll recommend
some learning resources.
So this is where in many
presentations you'll see the
obligatory layer cake diagram and
sort of one piece cut out and put in.
It's the technology framework assessment
and being a bit of a contrarian I decided
well you know we actually touch in
more than one place on that layer cake.
Math performance depends on the silicon,
the floating point cores,
it depends on the frameworks
that we deliver to you,
and it relies ever more on
the performance tools that
help you optimize your apps.
And that's in the Chud toolkit.
So let's review what's been done over
the last year since we last met at WWDC.
What do we deliver in Jaguar?
Libm, our standard C math library,
Libm is centered on the
following design principles.
First,
that we should be standards conforming.
You should see the C99 floating point
function entry points on our platform
just the way you do on everybody else's.
And that's certainly true
for doubles in Jaguar.
Our algorithms are
numerically robust in Libm.
It's really the central point that
our core approximations should
deliver correctly rounded results.
and the other engineers provide
insight into the features
of the Mac OS X library.
We bring you best of breed algorithms.
These are modern algorithms,
nothing from numerical
recipes here folks,
and matched to the hardware.
How do you code to this
stuff if you're writing in C?
Couldn't be simpler.
Include math.h.
If you have special needs and
you know who you are to touch
the floating point environment,
you can include FN.h and
otherwise compile and go.
Libm is part of the Lib system
umbrella that's automatically
linked on the CC line,
so you need to say no more.
So from time to time,
we get questions and
phone calls that say,
gee,
is it possible for me to go even faster
than what you've delivered in Libm?
The answer is yes,
but you have to make some compromises.
And it's been our position
that we're not making those
compromises in our deliverable Libm,
but we can clue you in
about what you need to do.
Libm emphasizes numerical robustness.
If you're willing to compromise on that,
you might be able to go a little faster.
Libm uses the standard C99 APIs,
which turn out to data starve our FPUs.
Typically,
a call like "sign" presents the
math library with a single argument,
and you're asked to -- the contract
is to return a single return value.
That ends up just leaving bubbles all
the way through the floating-point pipes.
If you can provide more
data through an API,
it's quite possible to produce results
faster and furiously out the other end.
Libm is obliged to handle all
the special cases -- nans,
infinities,
plus and minus zeros as needed.
And Libm is obliged to preserve, protect,
and defend the state of
the floating-point flags.
So there's a fair amount of detail
work that goes on in the library.
If you're willing to
compromise on that stuff,
you can go faster.
So here's a homely little example.
A very respected developer
came to us and said,
"Hey,
your hypotenuse function is way slow.
I can write a one-liner that goes
much faster than what you guys do."
So here you see the
Pythagorean algorithm,
a little pithy Pythagorean algorithm,
return the square root of
X squared plus Y squared.
And sure enough,
you run this function on a triangle
whose one leg is length three,
the other leg is length four,
and the hypotenuse is five.
Well, let's sort of scale this thing up.
I don't know,
is this the size of the universe
as we understand it these days?
In any case,
The result of applying this
function to these arguments is,
hmm, not five times e to the 160th,
but infinity.
Ooh.
So there's some
intermediate overflow here,
right?
And this developer made some compromises,
probably over the range of arguments that
he was interested in using this function.
Worked just fine.
But Libm takes on all comers
and we're obliged by standards
to do something different.
And here's just for...
This is like my clicker at home
after the kids have gotten to it.
There we go.
The purpose of this is for gestalt,
right?
There's a lot more going on
here than that simple one-liner.
Those with sharp eyes, unlike mine,
may notice, "Hmm, let's see.
"There's some comparisons up front."
a division halfway down,
finally that square root,
and a rescaling,
and some work on the environment.
So those are the kind of details
that LibM and the lengths that
LibM goes to to meet standards
and robustness requirements.
If you can compromise on those,
you might be able to go faster.
So that's the end of a long aside.
Delivered in Jaguar are vecLib.
We view vecLib as a one-stop
shopping place for math performance.
We deliver digital signal processing,
1 and 2D, real and complex FFTs,
the BLAS, level 1, 2, and 3.
These are based on the
open-source software Atlas,
automatically tuned
linear algebra system.
It actually is a code generation system.
Back at Cupertino, before every release,
I grind through Atlas.
It generates code for linear
algebra matched to the processor.
We get extraordinary
performance from this.
And for certain of the entry points,
it's actually SMP aware,
so you can go multiprocessor
transparently.
If the processor's there,
it goes ahead and uses it.
It's a wonderful, wonderful thing.
We also delivered LAPAC for
solving linear systems.
and eigenvalue problems, again,
open source software.
We delivered tuned 4x4, 8x8, 16x16,
and 32x32 matrix multiply, matrix matrix,
matrix vector, vector matrix.
These are for folks who know that
they're dealing with very specific
sizes and want to go really fast.
These are basically completely
unrolled loops and on the single
precision side hit AlteVec very,
very hard.
And so that's the next point,
is wherever AlteVec is
appropriate and available to use,
vecLib tries to go to AlteVec.
How do you code to vecLib using C?
Include vecLib vecLib.h,
that's the framework header.
You might want to take a peek
in there and see all the other
header files that get included,
cblas.h, clapac.h, vbignum, et cetera.
From there, you can fan out and find the
interfaces that you'd like to code to.
And then just add framework
vecLib to the CC line.
Well, we announced this week that there's
an umbrella framework called
Accelerate that will collect
all of our high-performance math.
And so in Panther,
you could just as well,
and it's probably the
right migration path,
link against framework Accelerate.
You'll get the same stuff.
So again, that same question comes
up every once in a while.
Can I go faster than the subroutine
that I'm calling in vecLib?
Well, if you've chosen the
appropriate entry point,
we think the answer is no, probably not.
We've squeezed these things pretty
hard and we'll continue to do so.
So let's move to Panther.
What's new in Panther for Libm?
Well, clearly, we've tuned for 970.
We've opened up all the core algorithms,
recast them to exploit the two FPUs,
the two LSUs,
paid very careful attention to
the way the instructions are
issued to the machine so that
we achieve maximum parallelism.
and we watch out for load store issues.
You'll see one of those
come up a little later.
And at long last we have
hardware square root.
This should be the end of
[Transcript missing]
There's also an opportunity
to inline Square Root.
There are compiler flags now.
If you're compiling and
you know you're on G5,
you can inline the Square Root to great,
great advantage.
So it turns out having
done all this work,
We went back and said, well,
now how's this going to
go on the older models,
the G4s?
Are we going to have to maintain
two copies of the library?
It turns out not.
At least for this code,
doing these kinds of things to tune
for 970 also helped us a little bit.
A few percent, not a whole lot,
but we're faster these
days on G4 as well.
Your mileage may vary.
It's worth experimenting before you
contemplate having multiple modules,
multiple plug-ins.
Go look and see if the things you
do for G5 don't also help you on G4.
So I talked a little bit in
the last slide about careful
construction of issue groups,
dispatch groups on the 970.
I wanted to put up one slide and
simply remark that the issue is this.
We've got a four-issue machine,
five if we've got a branch.
Need to be very careful that
if we're gonna try to get two,
let's say,
floating point multiply ads to issue on
Simultaneously on the two CPUs,
we need to make sure that each
instruction is fed into the issue
queue appropriate to the unit.
And that means placing the
instruction appropriately as it forms,
as the machine forms dispatch groups.
Chud is a champ in showing us
where we need to line up our
instructions a little bit differently.
The timers, the SIMG4, SIMG5,
soon to come tools are
also essential to do that.
That's probably enough said about that.
There's a trace later
on where we can return.
So how did we do when we
opened up our core algorithms,
did this work, and moved on to the G5?
Here are your favorite Libm functions.
Here are the cycles,
the number of machine cycles,
invocations of these functions for
typical arguments took on the 7455,
the G4, the high-end G4 model.
Here's what we've done on the 970.
Here's what our competition publishes.
for the P4.
And in general,
I think you'll see we're dominating the
competition even through clock scaling.
We're gonna go faster than
the fastest P4 you can buy.
The only question is around square root,
where it's neck and neck,
if you're able to inline,
you can get square root,
the first square root
out in about 40 cycles,
subsequent ones in 35 cycles,
and you can do that on two FPUs.
If you need to call
the subroutine library,
we pick up a little dynamic
linking overhead and can
only go essentially on one,
it's one of those data starve situations,
and we only go through one CPU,
one FPU in 52 cycles.
So let's call that a draw maybe.
Unless you can inline two at a time,
and then it's not so
much of a draw anymore.
So turning to the other big
component of our mathematics efforts,
vecLib, what's new in Panther for vecLib?
Double precision math performance, right?
We've all been waiting for real
good double precision engines.
We've now got two.
And vecLib takes great
advantage of those now.
Our DSP routines have been tuned
in double precision for the 970.
Blas has been tuned and has really,
I think,
just phenomenal performance on the 970.
The scheme we use, for example,
for matrix multiply derives from Atlas.
Given a very large matrix,
say a thousand by a thousand elements,
it gets broken down into
much smaller pieces,
64 by 64 in our case.
That data gets moved into
cache for each of the operands,
A times B, resulting in C.
And then we cut loose with what's
called the matmul kernel on that guy,
which takes the data,
which is lying in cache,
runs it through the floating point units,
develops the output argument, and repeat.
In that matmul kernel, we're able to,
oops.
we're able to sustain about 3.4
floating ops per clock cycle.
That's 84% of the peak
available on the machine,
and it measures out just about
6.7 gigaflops at 2 gigahertz.
When we look at the larger problem,
reassembling these 64
by 64 block results,
the overhead of pulling all
this stuff in and out of cache,
we get the DGEM performance
on a 1,000 by 1,000 matrix.
That runs from memory, from RAM,
1,000 by 1,000 matrix is
going to sit in RAM after all,
at 2.4 flops per clock.
That's about 60% of peak,
and measures out at about 4.8 gigaflops
on a single 2.0 gigahertz processor.
We've also added double precision 4x4,
8x8 special size matrices,
all tuned for the 970.
They achieve similar,
if not in some cases slightly better
performance than the DGIMM numbers.
We've completely
unrolled all those loops.
The matrices are small enough they
sit in the cache all the time.
It just goes like crazy.
and finally, we've goosed up LAPAC a bit.
If you're a fan of the
singular value decomposition,
you'll be happy to know we
go really fast on SVDs now.
And expect in Panther that
LAPAC will be thread safe.
and David Hale are the founders
of the Mac OS X library.
The results are in.
FFTs are really fast on this box.
These are some slides
giving performance of,
you'll see 1 and 2D,
real and complex FFTs
going to the vector unit.
Smaller numbers here in
microseconds are faster,
so we want to be underneath
the competition here and 1.
[Transcript missing]
How about our linear algebra performance?
The industry standard is the LAPAC 1000,
which is a solution of a linear system,
thousand by a thousand.
We use the Atlas-based techniques.
Those are blocked in the
way I told you before,
moving 64 by 64 chunks in and out of the
cache and going like mad with the kernel.
And let's just focus on this.
The first number is the one
that probably most folks...
Here's the pointer, are familiar with.
So our DLP,
that's Double Precision LINPACK 1000,
that's the Supercomputer Benchmark,
2.64 gigaflops.
We think that's PC industry leading.
So here's a pitch following on
from yesterday's Vimage session.
There's a new umbrella framework
in Panther called Accelerate.
One-stop shopping for all your
math and image processing needs.
Minus framework Accelerate gets you all
our digital signal processing stuff,
the linear algebra I've described,
a vector version of selected entry
points in Libm at single precision.
Some large number of arithmetic
support and the new Vimage
image processing library.
Moving forward,
code minus framework accelerates.
It's the right thing to do.
And additional math stuff
is going to end up in there.
So it's a way of the future.
Okay, so,
actually let me go back from it.
And it's how we leverage, right?
Use Accelerate and leverage Apple's work.
Here's the point of
leverage for you folks.
By selecting the right API,
you get the advantage of our
efforts getting these things fast.
So that's the segue into, well,
what if you've got code that
you'd like to go faster,
really doesn't fit into
any of the work we've done,
how do you go about doing that?
and David Pryor are the founders
of the Mac OS X library.
Profiling on the 970 is very interesting.
This is a machine that keeps
hundreds of instructions in flight,
has long and deep pipelines,
Very often I've looked at a trace
and had the "aha" experience.
This wasn't where I expected the
performance to be being spent.
Let's arrange to tune for that.
Mark R.
For a rough cut, you can use the command
line tool called sample.
But for the real action,
you want to use Shark.
That's part of the Chud toolkit.
It will zero in on your hot spots and
let you make really rapid progress.
It's been key in our development.
And so I'd like to introduce Eric Miller,
who'll come up and talk a
little bit about the Chud tools.
So anyways, I'm Eric Miller with the
Architecture and Performance Group.
Just a quick thing about the Chud Tools.
There was a big session yesterday,
I believe it was number 506.
There we go.
Microphone.
Can everybody hear me now?
Quick thing about Chud Tools.
There was a session yesterday,
I believe the number was 506,
is that correct?
And so that'll be on the DVD.
A very lengthy demonstration with
Shark that I think you should
all take advantage of that and
use Shark as much as you can.
But there are a couple
of other Chud Tools.
There's a suite, so there are probably
nine tools to go through.
We leverage the low-level performance
monitor counters inside the hardware
and in the operating system.
We put the ones in the operating
system in there just for this purpose.
You can find the problems and improve
your code with Shark and Monster.
And all the best things about
Chud tools is they're free.
We have an FTP site.
I urge you when you get your developer
tools CD and there's a Chud package,
install that package,
immediately update because we
drop an update every several days
while we're in our beta period.
And once we have a gold master,
it'll be probably on a semi-weekly basis.
There'll be fixes and improvements.
So we're introducing the Chud Tools 3.0.
Shark was formerly called
Shikari in version 2.0 and 2.5.
and the rest of the team are
working on the software for the 970.
The 970 is a great tool
for performance testing.
It can help you tune for the
dispatch grouping that the 970 uses.
Monster is a spreadsheet
for performance events,
things like cache misses,
instructions completed,
instructions dispatched, whether or not,
what kind of utilization you're
getting out of the various
floating point and factory units,
integer units in the processor.
Saturn can actually take advantage of the
PMCs and do call grab visualization with
additional information about what types
of performance events are being utilized
in a particular function in your code.
We have several tracing
tools and Steve will probably
talk to some of this stuff.
Amber is the most important tool because
it actually collects a trace from your
application of every single instruction
that's executed on the processor.
You take this trace and you
use that as input to ACID,
SIMG4, and once it comes out SIMG5.
You can also take advantage
of the CHUD framework,
which allows you to actually instrument
your applications to directly monitor
performance events or control the
profiling tools from inside your code so
you can bracket important pieces of code.
So I've mentioned performance
counters many times already
in just a couple of slides.
What they are is a set of special purpose
registers that exist in the processor
and memory controller and off in the
OS we have virtual performance counters.
These can be accessed by software,
obviously,
so we created the CHUD tools to
do that for you automatically.
Although there are actually
user versions of some of the
performance monitor counters that
you can access from user code,
but in general to set them up and
drive them requires a supervisor
application like the kernel,
so we put stuff in there.
As I mentioned earlier,
it's performance events and page
faults is one of the operating
systems you can measure.
There's quite a number of virtual
memory counters available in the
operating system performance counters
that you might want to take advantage
of for a very high-level look at
what's going on with your disk access
and virtual memory and physical
memory access in the operating system.
So, Steve has alluded to Shark.
That's the icon in the upper right there.
The nice thing about Shark is you
can profile over time and with the
Chud tools the profiling can be
as small as 50 microseconds per
sample or as large as a second.
Or you can use the events.
You can actually profile every so
many cycles you can take a sample.
Every so many instructions
completed you can take a sample.
You capture everything with
Shark from the kernel up through
your application so you can know
exactly where time is being spent,
in what framework time is being spent.
And as I mentioned the
overhead is very low.
It's about 40 to 50 microseconds per
sample you can expect to expend taking
data from the performance counters.
The other nice thing about Shark is
there's automated analysis.
Not only will it show you
where you're spending time,
it'll try and explain to you why
time is being spent there and
give you opportunities to try
to alleviate that bottleneck.
Steve also mentioned that you need,
again, that we use static analysis
to construct the theoretical
dispatch groups on the 970.
And this is all demonstrated
quite nicely in the 506 session,
which unfortunately was yesterday.
You can save and review all the sessions,
which of course should always be there,
but it's new in CHUD 3.
We didn't have save and
review for our tools before.
[Transcript missing]
The heavy tree trace,
in this particular case,
square roots on top.
And you can see some of the
types of outputs you can get.
There's some source code
in the right picture.
And some of the shark commentary that
comes in the form of these little
exclamation points in the column
toward the right of the window.
I'll just briefly touch on Monster.
Again, same thing, timed intervals,
event counts.
All the Chud tools have a hotkey,
even the command line tools.
If you're on the console,
you can hit option escape and
launch Shark's profiler and option
escape to toggle it off again.
Monster uses control escape.
So they can both be on the
system at the same time.
So the hotkey's kind of neat.
Even in a command line tool,
it'll just sit there waiting
for you to start profiling.
And you don't have to go into
the shell and type something.
You can just do it from anywhere on your,
wherever your app is,
you can go ahead and start that.
So the big thing about
Monster is shortcuts.
You can take these performance
monitor event counts and combine
them together with a simple four
function calculator notation.
So you can take cache misses and cycles.
And compute cache misses per
cycle or cycles per cache miss,
whichever way you want to do that.
Ratio.
You can also use the controller counter,
the memory controller counters and
compute bandwidth by collecting all
the transactions and multiplying by a
certain value that will represent bytes
per transaction for reads and writes,
this sort of thing.
And you can also create,
there are several shortcuts that
are predefined for each CPU.
But you can also make your own ratios and
proportions and percentages to print out.
And they come out in a
couple of different ways.
You can put it in the tabular columns of
Monster and then you can chart that data.
Same thing, save review sessions,
command line version.
There's a picture.
So there's some shortcuts
that have been highlighted,
those purple columns on the left,
and then you graph them by
pressing the draw chart button.
These are percentages of load
store instructions with regard
to all the instructions that
were collected in the trace.
and David S.
The first step is to create a code
that will record your function call
history and instruments all your code
by using the GCC instrumentation flags.
Very similar to Code Warrior has
some instrumentation flags
that will put a prologue and
an epilogue in every function.
Then once you have those
prologues and epilogues,
the data can be collected.
You can see a typical call tree in the
top half of the screen and then you
can get the picture of the call tree.
The call depth is vertical and the time
the call was executing is horizontal.
So if you have long spiky calls,
you want to try to
alleviate those issues.
You can use call,
you can collect call counts,
that's great,
but you can also collect PMC event
counts and see those things and
what kind of duration they had.
So, and we have these instruction
tracing tools that I mentioned.
ACID's kind of nice as a quick pass.
It's sort of SIMG4, SIMG5 lite.
You just can collect trace statistics.
So you use AMBER and collect an
instruction trace that's accurate.
Then you run ACID on it.
You can get these pieces of data
out of ACID very readily in maybe
one or two screens in a terminal.
Whereas SIMG4 and SIMG5 are very
cycle accurate simulators for their
respective processors and it takes
some learning which Steve will get
into to understand their output.
Using the Chud framework,
you can instrument your source code,
start and stop the other
graphic user interface tools,
and also directly read and write the
performance counters in your code.
There's also the HTML reference
guide is generated every time
we do a build of the framework.
The HTML is updated to any new
things we put in the prologues.
So a quick example, you can,
you always chud initialize
whenever you use this stuff.
You require remote access and you tell
Shark that you want to use remote access.
Then you start Shark and give it a label.
Then your important function executes.
Then you stop it and release
remote access so another thread
or another client can use it.
But then Shark will automatically
profile your important function
and your important function only.
And you'll get the results in the GUI.
Slightly longer example where you
actually set the counters explicitly,
clear them, start them,
then your important work happens.
Then you stop the counters
and then you take the,
it returns arrays of double
precision floating point values.
If there's six counters,
there'll be six entries, one for each,
zero through five, in the output arrays.
You take those output arrays
and then do whatever you want to
do to present them to yourself.
Maybe log them or chart them.
This thing is a little finicky.
So, how do you get CHUD?
The easiest way is it's
on the developer tool CD,
but updates will come
directly from the web.
There's an updater that
will run automatically the
first time you install CHUD,
and thereafter there's preferences.
You can check the status of the
CHUD package for new updates hourly,
daily, weekly, or monthly.
We do have internal guys that do check
hourly and they get upset when a couple
hours go by and there's no new updates.
So the best way to get in contact
with our team is to use the
chud-tools-feedback@group.apple.com.
And with that I will turn
it back over to Steve.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Thank you, Eric.
I think I'm going to go with a keyboard.
Eric has covered the astonishing
capabilities of Chud,
but don't think you have to
do anything really special.
The most you need to do, really,
is to learn to use the hot key.
If you haven't been down
to the performance lab,
the G5 performance lab, with your app,
please do come down.
If you find me there,
I'm likely to be a pest and
hover over your shoulder,
wait until your app is
running and grinding the CPU,
and say, hey, can I start Chud?
And it's basically start the app,
hit the hot key, wait a few seconds,
and then look at the samples.
People have been dropping jaw at
what they see and how simple it is.
Chud comes up.
I'll take a question at the end.
- Quick question,
you don't even need that, so,
and we can show you why.
So people are quite astonished to see
how quickly it happens and sort of
the almost immediate insight they get,
gee, there's my high runner right
at the top of the window.
Let's click into that and see which
instructions are slowing me down here.
It's really a great thing.
So with some background
on Chud behind us,
I now want to talk a little bit about
this regimen I go through to really
torque down and get some performance
out of floating point intensive code.
First concern often is memory.
The machine has an enormous amount of
bandwidth if you can use it effectively.
You need to load data early so
that it's available early to the
out-of-order execution cores.
If the data ain't there,
the cores can't do the instructions,
so get the data there early.
So in examples, you'll see that I load
polynomial coefficients,
literal constants very
early on in subroutines,
even speculatively.
Even if they may not be used in
a particular branch of the code,
I'll often load them early just
to have them available in the
case we drop through and go.
So load early, load often,
harness the two LSUs to
drive those two FPUs.
If you can load data sequentially,
there are hardware-initiated prefetch
streams that are really effective at
getting the data into the machine.
DST and vecDST, the moto entry point,
are bad eggs.
and David Koehn are the founders of
the DPC-ZL class instruction framework.
They're a big help on G4.
They're execution synchronizing on G5.
They probably ought to be avoided.
You're better off if you want to
prefetch data using the DCB-TL,
DCB-ZL class instructions.
You need to be aware that the cache
line size on the 970 is 128 bytes.
So did I say that the
970 has two FPU cores?
I think so.
Use them.
[Transcript missing]
Since there are two FPUs,
a simple strategy for making
sure that you're getting both
FPUs fully utilized is to think
that you've got a 12 cycle pipe.
That is, start a result,
don't plan to use it
until 12 cycles later,
12 intervening operations.
That often means you need to think a
little bit more about parallelizing
software pipelining your algorithms to
get that kind of distance between uses.
So here's a little piece
on choice of algorithm.
Sometimes you need to sort of just
pop up a couple of levels and think,
is there some way to recast
the algorithm I have to be more
effective on floating point?
So the example is it takes
two hands to matrix multiply.
You're trying to form the matrix
C as the product of A and B.
In high school,
or I guess junior high school nowadays,
you learn how to take the product
of two N by N matrices by using two
hands to form the output elements C,
I, J.
You take the Ith row in one hand
and the Jth column in the other
hand and you form a dot product.
2n fetches and n multiplied later,
you have a single element
of the output Cij.
[Transcript missing]
To form the 4x4 output block in matrix C,
you grab four elements.
and David Koehn will be
joined by the two of them.
Thank you.
Possible products, pairwise products.
Continue down in rows and in columns.
You've done, and let me,
I'm just going to look at this
so I remember it exactly right.
You're accumulating 16
simultaneous inner products.
It requires 8 end fetches,
16N operations,
that's actually a factor of four
reduction in memory bandwidth.
You've used nearly all the registers
and it's possible to keep the
floating point units bubble free.
And basically that's the trick that
Atlas uses and our MatML kernel
to drive the machine at,
in the kernel, 84% of peak.
So the take-home message is,
think parallel if you can,
but small parallel, you know,
four by four, it's manageable.
So here's a little case study I thought
we'd go through that gets a little
bit more into the tracing tools.
The code is the arm of the Libm sine
function for arguments that are smallish,
between pi over 4 and minus pi over 4.
and just to set some
landmarks for orientation,
you'll see that there's an absolute
value function taken at the top,
comparison here to decide
if we're in the right arm,
some manipulation of the
floating point environment,
some arithmetic and then what looks
like a polynomial approximation.
Formation of the final result.
Some more adjustment of the floating
point environment and out we go.
So on the G4 series,
we had a tool called SIMG4.
And if we look at this
segment of code run on,
again, a smallish argument to sign,
We see this picture.
This is actually a very good picture,
SIMG4 wise.
At the top, let's see if I can get
this thing going again.
All right, here we go.
For our landmark,
there's that FABs instruction,
and we read across to see this FABs
instruction issued roughly at cycle 1200,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Spent two cycles getting
instruction fetch,
one in dispatch, a couple in execution,
and then retired.
Next line, store word with update,
additional time.
The object here is to fall off the cliff.
You're retiring instructions
as fast as you can.
So this looks pretty good.
This code's really quite good on G4.
Taking just that code unchanged,
bringing it to the G5, the 970,
and using the SIM G5 trace, well,
first of all,
it's a more complicated machine.
and the letters have changed.
So we spend some time in fetch,
Five cycles in dispatch,
some time in the mapper,
we finally hit execution
unit five for that Fabs,
which is now on the
other side of the screen.
We finish that operation, what,
six cycles later,
and we hang around and wait
for the rest of that completion
group to all finish up,
and then we complete.
This doesn't look too bad either.
Again,
the object is to fall off the cliff.
Well,
until we get down to the bottom here,
this is trouble.
And there's a key for these letters,
and if we were to look up the key,
we'd see that we had
essentially a load store reject.
So somebody is trying to
load a load store reject.
from an address that was recently stored.
Well, how recently?
Turns out that store occurred way up top.
This is a machine that's putting
hundreds of instructions in flight.
These dependencies can stretch out
over really large lengths of code.
Beware, be forewarned,
and watch out for these kind of things.
By adjusting for this,
it turns out this is the manipulation
of the floating point environment.
We can end up doing quite a bit better.
You'll notice, first of all,
this is shorter.
and the fall off the clip
is much more precipitous.
And we've eliminated that
nastiness down in here.
So, that's the kind of information
you can gain from the SIMG4,
SIMG5 class of tools.
I think it's an adjunct to Chud.
I think Chud with Shark is
the first place to look.
But when you, you know,
wanna eek out the last
little bit of performance,
this is the tool that I turn to.
So here's the final version of that code.
Just for landmarks,
there's that FABs again.
Still have the compares, but we've,
turns out we've manipulated the
environment by bringing it into
register rather than storing.
I've adopted this style where I split
across a single line in the C code places
where I think I can gain parallelism.
So here's loading early and often
of the polynomial coefficients.
Here are operations that I believe
go in parallel on the dual FPUs.
And then out.
So, quick summary of the
regimen I like to use.
Start with Chud, look at Shark,
go back to your code,
pay attention to load store issues.
Think in terms of dual FPUs.
Even just organizing the layout of your
code can help you think when you can take
advantage of things going in parallel.
Use as many registers as possible.
Let the hardware-initiated prefetch
streams help you get data into
the machine early and often.
and when directed by SIMG4,
SIMG5 kind of tools,
look at dispatch group formation
just to make sure that you're not
crowding instructions that you think
ought to be going to separate FPUs,
one on top of the other
in a single issue queue.
That was the slide that came
much earlier in the talk.
So, time to wrap up.
You can review these sessions on the DVD.
can contact myself or Ali for questions.
Ali does a little skunk works
operation every once in a while,
but he can tell you about that.
and for more information,
there are two really fine tech notes
now on the web at the developer site.
[Transcript missing]
There's some other interesting
documentation at the,
somebody.html here.
We'll have to resolve this.
And finally,
I'm a big fan of the fellow who writes
for Ars Technica describing the PowerPC.
This is a really lovely introduction
to the machine and a good place to
start a quiet evening with your laptop.